# Project Data Warehouse
## Project Overview

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

In this project, we will create an ETL pipeline to build a data warehouses hosted on Redshift. 

## Song Dataset 
We will be working with two datasets that reside in S3. 

#### Song Dataset: 
It's a subset of real data from [Million Song Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID.

Sample Data:
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

## Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this  [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim)  based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month. 

Sample Data: 

    {"artist":null,"auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Walter","gender":"M","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Frye","length":null,"level":"free","location":"San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA","method":"GET","page":"Home","registration":1540919166796.0,"sessionId":38,"song":null,"status":200,"ts":1541105830796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"39"}


## Schema for Song Play Analysis

#### Fact Table
songplays - records in event data associated with song plays. Columns for the table:

    songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

#### Dimension Tables 
##### users

    user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
##### songs

    song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration

##### artists

    artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude

##### time

    start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday


## How to Run
#### Use [Redshift_Cluster_IaC.py](https://github.com/san089/Data_Engineering_Projects/blob/master/Redshift_Cluster_IaC.py "Redshift_Cluster_IaC.py") from [Data_Engineering_Projects](https://github.com/san089/Data_Engineering_Projects) to launch Redshift Cluster.

#### Setup Configurations 
Setup the dwh.cfg file (File not added in this repository). File format for **dwh.cfg**

```
[CLUSTER]
HOST=''
DB_NAME=''
DB_USER=''
DB_PASSWORD=''
DB_PORT=5439

[IAM_ROLE]
ARN=<IAM Role arn>

[S3]
LOG_DATA='s3://udacity-dend/log_data'
LOG_JSONPATH='s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json'
SONG_DATA='s3://udacity-dend/song_data'

```

#### Create tables

    $ python create_tables.py

#### Load Data

    $ python create_tables.py


Reference: [AWS Redshift Doc](https://aws.amazon.com/redshift/getting-started/?p=rs&bttn=hero&exp=b)

# Project Datawarehouse

## Project description

Sparkify is a music streaming startup with a growing user base and song database.

Their user activity and songs metadata data resides in json files in S3. The goal of the current project is to build an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to. 

## How to run

1. To run this project you will need to fill the following information, and save it as *dwh.cfg* in the project root folder.

```
[CLUSTER]
HOST=''
DB_NAME=''
DB_USER=''
DB_PASSWORD=''
DB_PORT=5439

[IAM_ROLE]
ARN=

[S3]
LOG_DATA='s3://udacity-dend/log_data'
LOG_JSONPATH='s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json'
SONG_DATA='s3://udacity-dend/song_data'

[AWS]
KEY=
SECRET=

[DWH]
DWH_CLUSTER_TYPE       = multi-node
DWH_NUM_NODES          = 4
DWH_NODE_TYPE          = dc2.large
DWH_CLUSTER_IDENTIFIER = 
DWH_DB                 = 
DWH_DB_USER            = 
DWH_DB_PASSWORD        = 
DWH_PORT               = 5439
DWH_IAM_ROLE_NAME      = 
```

2. Create a python environment with the dependencies listed on *requirements.txt*
3. Run the *create_cluster* script to set up the needed infrastructure for this project.

    `$ python create_cluster.py`

4. Run the *create_tables* script to set up the database staging and analytical tables

    `$ python create_tables.py`

5. Finally, run the *etl* script to extract data from the files in S3, stage it in redshift, and finally store it in the dimensional tables.

    `$ python create_tables.py`


## Project structure

This project includes five script files:

- analytics.py runs a few queries on the created star schema to validate that the project has been completed successfully.
- create_cluster.py is where the AWS components for this project are created programmatically
- create_table.py is where fact and dimension tables for the star schema in Redshift are created.
- etl.py is where data gets loaded from S3 into staging tables on Redshift and then processed into the analytics tables on Redshift.
- sql_queries.py where SQL statements are defined, which are then used by etl.py, create_table.py and analytics.py.
- README.md is current file.
- requirements.txt with python dependencies needed to run the project

## Database schema design
State and justify your database schema design and ETL pipeline.

#### Staging Tables
- staging_events
- staging_songs

####  Fact Table
- songplays - records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong - 
*songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent*

#### Dimension Tables
- users - users in the app - 
*user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level*
- songs - songs in music database - 
*song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration*
- artists - artists in music database - 
*artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude*
- time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units - 
*start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday*


## Queries and Results

Number of rows in each table:

| Table            | rows  |
|---               | --:   |
| staging_events   | 8056  |
| staging_songs    | 14896 |
| artists          | 10025 |
| songplays        | 333   |
| songs            | 14896 |
| time             |  8023 |
| users            |  105  |



