
## Udactity Data Engineer Nanodegree Project: Data Modeling with Postgres

The objective of this project is to create a SQL analytics database for a fictional music streaming service called Sparkify. Sparkify's analytics team seeks to understand what, when and how users are playing songs on the company's music app. The analysts need an easy way to query and analyze the data, which is currently locally stored in raw JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app on.

As the data engineer assigned to the project, my role is to create a database schema and upload the data into a PostgreSQL database and implement an ETL pipeline for this analysis.


### Datasets available

The song dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID.

The log dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by [this event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

## Prerequisites

This project makes the folowing assumptions:

* Python 3 is available
* `pandas` and `psycopg2` are available
* A PosgreSQL database is available on localhost

## Running the Python Scripts

At the terminal:

1. ```python create_tables.py```
2. ```python etl.py```

In IPython:

1. ```run create_tables.py```
2. ```run etl.py```

### Program execution

* Execute the script to generate the database and its tables by executing `python3 create_tables.py`.
* Load the data and insert it to the database by executing `python3 etl.py`.


## ETL Process

### Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```
{
    "num_songs": 1,
    "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7",
    "artist_latitude": null,
    "artist_longitude": null,
    "artist_location": "",
    "artist_name": "Line Renaud",
    "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1",
    "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff",
    "duration": 152.92036,
    "year": 0
}
```

This information is parsed to populate the Songs and Artists Dimension tables.

### Log Dataset

The log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

This data contains information of which songs Users listened to at a specific time. Information is parsed to provide data for the Songplays Fact table and the Users and Time Dimension tables. The ```songplays.artist_id``` and ```songplays.song_id``` columns are populated by a lookup based on the Song Title, Artist Name and song Duration.

## Description of Files

### Directory: data/log_data

This directory contains a collection of JSON log files. These files are used to populate our Fact table - Song Plays - and to populate the Dimension tables for Users and Time.

### Directory: data/song_data

This directory contains a collection of Song JSON files. These files are used to populate Dimension tables for Songs and Artists.

### create_tables.py

This Python script recreates the database and tables used to storethe data.

### etl.ipynb

A Python Jupyter Notebook that was used to initially explore the data and test the ETL process.

### etl.py

This Python script reads in the Log and Song data files, processes and inserts data into the database.

### requirements.txt

A list of Python modules used by this project.

### sql_queries.py

A Python script that defines all the SQL statements used by this project.

### test.ipynb

A Python Jupyter Notebook that was used to test that data was loaded properly.

## Purpose of this database

This database allows to aggregate all songs, artists, users and songplays in a single database. In this way, the company disposes of the needed data stored in a unique structure and can thus analyze different scenarios easily. For instance, one can analyze the popularity of different songs or artists. Also, it is possible to perform analysis with geographic information. One can for instance determine which song is popular in which country and region.
